Sports betting in the United States is big business that is booming and appears set to enter the mainstream. This study evaluates our ability to predict outcomes of National Basketball Association (NBA) games with a higher rate of accuracy than current predictions generated by lines makers.  The study uses 11 years of historical NBA box score data to generate predictions of game outcome and produce model that is profitable.  

Sports betting in America has always been prevalent but mostly underground.  With the exception of Nevada sports betting has been illegal in the United States..  However, that seems to be starting to change.  This May the Supreme Court of the United States rules that a federal law prohibiting states from legalizing and regulating sports betting was unconstitutional, opening the door for states to begin legalizing and regulating sports betting.  As states look for new sources of revenue sports betting is an attractive option.  New Jersey has already legalized sports betting and many other states are exploring the possibility of following suit.  A total new sports betting landscape could be on the horizon.

In addition, the professional sports leagues have started to explore the possibility of actively marketing their sports through gambling.  In August the NBA signed a contract with MGM
Resorts allowing MGM to use the NBA logo and official highlights in their promotions.  Sports leagues have started to notice that associations with gambling might increase their popularity and their revenues.  

In this changing landscape this study conducts an analysis in an attempt to predict the wether the home team covers or not.  The goal of the study is to predict with an accuracy over 52.38% , the breakeven point for wagering with a -110 line.   Any predictive ability in excess of 52.38% is deemed a success.

The study uses 11 years of historical NBA data to create and model the process.  The results are mixed.  While the model is not able to generate data the out predict the NBA line across the board.  It is able to find situations that it can exploit and create a framework that is promising in finding more value.  The study ends up modeling NBA playoff games and predicts a return rate of between of over 10% on NBA playoff games.  The process is driven by machine learning and is not easily interpretable as feature extraction and ensemble modeling techniques are used to generate predictions.  

In conclusion, with sports betting beginning to enter the mainstream arena as series of new opportunities are going to open up for modeling in the sporting space.  Lines makers are going to need more resources to create an accurate and profitable spread for the book makers and better will look to get more sophisticated methods of predicting outcomes for profit.  This study takes the first steps in improving modeling in the process and creates a blueprint by which sports betters may be able to beat the current system of lines makers.
